Michael Gove good afternoon and welcome
to this number 10 press conference on
our progress in the fight against
coffered 19 I'm joined today by
Professor Steve Paris the national
medical director at NHS England in a
moment or two I'll hand over to Steve to
take us through the slide updates from
the Cabinet Office briefing room
but first I want to set out the latest
coronavirus data 1 million two hundred
and six thousand four hundred and five
tests for coronavirus have now been
carried out in the UK including seventy
six thousand four hundred and ninety-six
yesterday overall one hundred and eighty
six thousand five hundred and ninety
nine people have tested positive that's
an increase of four thousand three
hundred and thirty nine cases since
yesterday
fourteen thousand two hundred and forty
eight people are currently being treated
in hospital for coronavirus compared to
14 thousand six hundred and ninety five
yesterday sadly of those who have tested
positive for coronavirus across all
settings twenty eight thousand four
hundred and forty six have died behind
the numbers there's been an increase of
three hundred and fifteen deaths since
yesterday across all settings this
pandemic has claimed more than twenty
eight thousand lives and each one of
them is precious each one valued each
one irreplaceable the pain of
bereavement and heartbreak is deeply
personal but as a society we are showing
care and compassion across boundaries
offering support and a chance to talk
through grief together and for those
experiencing the first Ramadan without a
loved one this will be a particularly
painful time I send my sincere
condolences to all families who are
grieving as with Christians who could
not celebrate Easter together in church
and the Jewish community whose Passover
rituals were affected by social
distancing our thoughts are with Muslim
neighbors who cannot break their fast
together I must adapt their religious
and cultural practices because of the
crisis we have all learned to adapt and
we must carry on doing so after the
Prime Minister sets out how we will
back to work later this week his
comprehensive plan will explain how we
can get our economy moving how we can
get our children back to school how we
can travel to work more safely and how
we can make life in the workplace safer
but before we can ease the existing
restrictions we must ensure the
government's five tests are met that the
number of cases are falling that death
rates are declining that the NHS has
what it needs and that measures are in
place to stop a second peak overwhelming
the NHS are particularly conscious that
those in the front line of our public
services will need clear guidance on
safe working they'll need the right
personal protective equipment and
appropriate access to testing if we have
to make all the progress that we want in
the weeks ahead we're consulting with
employers and unions professionals and
public health experts to establish how
we can ensure that we have the safest
possible working environments and the
Prime Minister will be saying more later
this week on personal protective
equipment for key workers we are
increasing the spread of distribution
and supply from February 25th to May the
second we had delivered over 1.08
billion items of PPE across the health
and social care system within England
and tens of millions more have been
distributed by our colleagues in the
devolved administration's this overall
figure includes a hundred and forty nine
million masks 173 million aprons two
million Gans and six hundred and
fourteen of million gloves on the second
of May alone we delivered an additional
20 million items of PPE within England
but there is much more to do and the
work led by Lord Dayton to improve
domestic production of PPE is vital to
our efforts and on testing thanks to the
hard work of so many across the NHS
public health England our pharmaceutical
sector and our universities we have
tested over 200,000 key workers and
their families allowing those who don't
have the virus to go back to work and
protecting those who do we have now of
course extended the criteria for testing
beyond key workers to anyone over 65
displaying symptoms
and anyone who has to travel to get to
work and this week we will be piloting
new test track and trace procedures on
the Isle of Wight with a view to having
them in place more widely later this
month all of these steps will help us to
get more people back to work and help to
support the delivery of our public
services and I want to thank those
who've done so much to maintain the
provision of critical public services
during this crisis our teachers of what
incredibly hard to perform in
educational support to millions and the
government has committed 100 million
pounds to boost remote learning for
those who need it most
our newly launched oak national academy
is supplementing all the work done by
schools and teachers by providing 180
video lessons each week and what
particularly keen to help vulnerable and
disadvantaged children carry on with
their education during the pandemic
schools continue to receive additional
funding in the form of the pupil premium
for those pupils who most deserve it
worth around 2.4 billion annually and
we've ordered laptops to help
disadvantaged young people who will be
sitting key exams next year we're also
providing laptops and tablets for those
children with social workers and care
leavers to help them stay in touch with
the services they need keeping them safe
and supporting home learning and if
disadvantaged Sectary school pupils and
care leavers who are preparing for exams
do not have internet access
we will provide free routers to get them
connected while schools are closed over
the Easter holidays we were able to
ensure that more than 60% of schools
were open every day with places for both
vulnerable children and those of
critical workers and the free school
meal voucher scheme ensured the children
who needed it could continue to access
food despite school closures so far
15500 schools have placed orders for
vouchers of which over 35 million pounds
has been redeemed the latest available
data shows that around 49 thousand of
the children and attendants on April the
24th were classed by schools as
vulnerable more than double the figure
from a week earlier and while this is
going in the right direction we estimate
this still represents only around one in
ten
of all children and young people
classified as vulnerable we want to see
this figure go up further and we're
working with local authorities schools
and colleges to provide improved support
to vulnerable young people all this
additional support of course takes time
puts pressure on existing staff and
costs money
that's why we've pledged an additional
1.6 billion pounds to councils are
crossing them to support their essential
frontline services including adult
social care this son takes the funding
given to councils to over 3.2 billion
parents to help communities through this
crisis we've also deployed military
support to assist the public sector the
coffered support force mobilized by the
mo D is now 20,000 strong today over
3,600 personnel are deployed in support
of 86 separate projects in which
military aid is being given to civil
authorities on a national level they're
helping the Ministry of housing
communities and local government the
Department of Hope Health and Social
Care and also the NHS with planning and
logistics in England Scotland and Wales
on the ground they're helping to build
and to staff the temporary Nightingale
hospitals and to operate both regional
testing centers for coronavirus of which
there are now 49 around the country and
also the mobile testing units that we
are rolling out to date there are 77 off
across the country 156 military planners
are embedded at grassroots level with
our existing local resilience forums
partnerships of emergency services local
authorities the NHS the Environment
Agency and others they're helping to
coordinate and to protect our vital
local services and supplies with the
additional support of senior Whitehall
officials in addition we have to thank
local government for their energetic
work because since the end of March
90% of rough sleepers known to councils
have been made an offer of accommodation
reassuring them about their safety and
the government more widely is also
working hard to support those who have
not been identified as shielded but are
still vulnerable in the coming days
we'll be delivering our one-millionth
parcel of essential food to those at
highest risk across the country up to
two hundred thousand telephone calls a
day are being made
yielded and councils are helping to
support them in other ways including
organizing regular calls from volunteers
to those who are isolated in our
communities the support put in place by
many local organizations has been
inspirational as people step up to help
friends and neighbors and the government
has helped to mobilize another important
lifeline through the NHS volunteers of
responders program over 600,000 people
have had their ID verified and are
helping with the daily errands that make
such a significant difference
collecting shopping making contact as a
human voice on the end of a telephone
and transporting patients and supplies
for the NHS and of course we are all
working with supermarkets to ensure that
a greater number of online delivery
slots are made available to those most
in need in every one of these areas the
government in Westminster has been
working with ministers from the Scottish
government the Welsh government and the
Northern Ireland Executive this has
helped us to monitor and react to the
path of the virus across the nations
enabling us to intervene wherever people
are in need at each of these daily press
conferences we've paid tribute to the
compassion and dedication of our key
public sector workers I recognise how
much we all owe to their stoicism and
steadfastness nurses doctors Porter's
cleaners paramedics pharmacists care
home staff prison and police officers
teachers social workers those preparing
and delivering food collecting our
refuse and administering our welfare
system they deserve our gratitude they
deserve our support they are in awe of
our minds they are the very best of us
we owe them so much and we in government
will do everything we can to support
them during the next phases of our
pandemic response and I will now hand
over to Professor Paris to take us
through the latest developments on the
pandemic thank you and good afternoon so
if I may start by reminding everybody
the once again of the five tests the
government has set for adjusting the
lockdown so these are shown here in the
first slide the first is that the NHS
has sufficient capacity to provide
critical care and specialist treatment
right across the UK
and of course I'm delighted that the NHS
to date has been able to deal
magnificently with the surge in
coronavirus patients that we've seen but
that needs to continue and we need to be
confident that the same is true going
forward into the months ahead
secondly that we see a sustained and
consistent fall in daily debts from
coronavirus and as I will show you later
that is indeed occurring now although we
need to make sure that it is sustained
thirdly that there is reliable data to
show that the rate of infection is
decreasing to manageable levels across
the board and although we are confident
that we have seen a decrease in the
spread of the virus in the community we
need to see the data and be sure of the
data to know that that is indeed the
case and can be sustained fourthly that
the operational challenge is some of
which you have just heard about
including testing and PPE are in hand
are now in a position that we'll be able
to meet future demand in the months
ahead
and fifthly confidence that any
adjustments to the current social
distancing measures do not risk a second
peak of infection a transmission rate
that goes above r1 in other words one
person infecting on average more than
one because that will lead to a rise
over time of the number of people who
are infected and then increased pressure
on the NHS once again so those are the
five tests now as we have said many many
times the British public has responded
magnificently to the request of the
government to comply with the social
distancing measures and in the next
slide we give you some more data on the
evidence that that compliance has been
high and you can see here that in retail
and recreation in the workplace and
transit stations representing public
transport but also in other areas that
we have seen a decline in the time
people are spending in those settings
and I think this overall as with other
slides that we have shown you of the
last week's shows that the public
continues to respond to the requests to
social to deserve to keep social
distancing measures to comply to protect
the NHS and to save lives now in the
next slide we show you the number of
positive tests of the story of daily
tests in the UK and you will have heard
a little bit about that again today and
you will see that texting capacity has
ramped up very quickly over the last
week or so and we are now at a very high
level of testing over a hundred thousand
a little bit of a dip in the weekend but
we anticipate that that testing capacity
will continue to increase and it's a
very important component of our approach
going forward in the next slide you see
how that translates into new cases so
that tests positive cases and again you
seen an increase in recent days and I
think that reflects that we are now
testing in more settings where allow
we're able to let more people come
forward for testing because testing
capacity is ramped up but the numbers
have not increased dramatically and I
think that means even with more testing
it's evidence that the rate of infection
in in community is declining in the next
slide you will see how that translates
into people in hospital with kovat 19:00
and as I've said many times this is a
mild disease for the vast majority of
people but unfortunately for some a
hospital admission is required and you
can see that the peak of hospital
admissions has now passed particularly
in London where we saw the steepest rise
and we have now started to see the
steepest fall and since the middle of
April we have begun to see a decline in
the overall number of people in hospital
and that again is evidence that the
transmission rate of the virus in the
community is falling and that is
translating into fewer people being
admitted into hospital and then the next
slide that shows again how this
translates into the usage of critical
care beds so these are our sickest
patience again a small minority but
nevertheless a very important group of
people that will have to receive care in
intensive therapy units and you can see
once again as a proportion this has been
declining since the middle of April and
indeed if we looked at the absolute
numbers you would see a decline in
absolute numbers - so again evidence
that we are seeing the benefits of
complying with social distancing
measures and the reduction in
transmission of the virus in the
community is beginning to have an effect
on fewer people in critical care and
then finally the last two slides are
unfortunately represent those who have
died of course
there are stories behind every single
death and and our heart goes out to
those loved ones who suffered the loss
of a relative or a friend but you can
see that on a seven-day rolling average
on these figures provided by public
health England positive health and
developed administration's that the
trend now is downwards so it does appear
that we are past the peak of death - and
we are beginning to see a decline in the
number of deaths which of course it's
good news and again represents the
benefits of complying with social
distancing and then in the final slide
as we've shown before an international
comparison now reporting a UK debt in
all settings remember previously in
these charts showing that we were
reporting for some time deaths in
hospitals this is now all settings and
again the usual caveats with this that
different countries measure this
differently the the measure that I think
we all recognize will be the key measure
is excess deaths for all mortality
because that will take it into account
the overall effect of the pandemic but
it will be some time before that sort of
comparison can be done between countries
thank you thank you very much Steve
thank you um turn now to questions and
um I believe that we have two questions
from members of the public which have
been submitted
what lessons have you learned to prepare
our health into care systems for the
expected future waves of the virus and
how you're ensuring that we have
adequate supplies of working ventilators
and PPE for those expected future waves
now well that question was from Chris
and London what lessons have we learned
for future waves of the virus
how will we ensure that we have enough
PPE and ventilators in the future we're
letter learning lessons all the time as
indeed the world is this is a a new
virus and scientists are working
internationally to determine what the
best means is of dealing with it that's
why we are piloting treatments which can
prevent the virus once people have been
infected becoming more dangerous for
them it's also why we're working
internationally to seek to secure a
vaccine foe of course we expect that may
be some time away but one of the things
that we have learned is how to improve
our testing capacity we also now have
increased domestic ventilation
production and location is increasing
domestic PPE production as well and I
think the lessons that we're learning in
the UK are similar to the lessons that
other countries are learning as well
Steve yes well as you've heard the chief
medical officer say at this podium going
forward the intention will be to keep
the transmission rate the r-value below
one that is one of the five tests set by
the government for adjusting the lock
down as I mentioned a few minutes ago
and if we can do that successfully then
we should protect ourselves against
future waves of the virus but having
said that nothing is ever certain and
it's absolutely the case that we need to
go forward putting in place the measures
within the NHS to ensure that if for
whatever reason we do see our future
waves that we can cope with this and I
think the lesson that I've learned is
that the NHS is able to behave
incredibly flexibly incredibly agile and
surge its capacity at very short notice
if you go back only a month or two when
we were at the start
- this the NHS was planning on how we
could manage an increase in the number
of cases of people with kovat 19 at at
that time remember we were seeing health
systems in other parts of the world
becoming overwhelmed so you will
remember the pictures from Wuhan in
China at the very start of this in
January you will remember the images we
saw from northern Italy when that Health
System became became overwhelmed and
patients had to be flown to other
countries and you will remember seeing
images in closer countries France of
patients having to be moved out of major
urban centers such as Paris and so what
I learned is that the NHS and the great
staff of the NHS when given that
challenge can very very rapidly put in
place the extra capacity that is
required and and they have done that
magnificently and at no point during the
surge of cases in April was the NHS in a
position where it was not able to give
the treatment to patients with kovat
19:00 that they needed that is a great
testament to - - how well the NHS has
been able to cope and I think then the
lesson going forward is one that we can
do that but - we need to keep that
capacity in place but we need to keep it
in place at the same time standing up
all the other services that the NHS is a
is providing that the ones we've always
provided the emergency services but some
of the services that we've had to stand
down during April so elective surgery
for instance so my lesson is that the
NHS is incredibly flexible it can
respond to this challenge and it will
respond to the challenge going forward
into the months ahead
thank you Steve thank you we'll turn to
the next question submitted from the
public Rebecca from Scotland asks we see
daily charts showing the quantifiable
scientific effects of lockdown how are
you taking into account the
unquantifiable non-scientific social and
emotional effects when considering the
balance between benefit and damage
caused by lockdown well Rebecca we're
seeking all the time to make sure that
we balance the need to protect life to
protect the NHS with an acknowledgement
you're right that lockdown will have an
impact on the the mental and emotional
well-being of so many of our citizens
and of course
by suppressing economic activity it also
means that the the wealth the country
needs in order to ensure that we have
high quality public services is affected
as well but the five tests that have
been laid down and which D reminders of
earlier are a very good way of making
sure that we can make an appropriate
judgment because the worst thing to do
would be to prematurely relax the
current measures to see a second spike
which won't risk overwhelming the NHS
and which would compel us to introduce
lockdown measures all over again
that would be the most dangerous of
course I think for us to take Steve yes
so as a doctor I am very aware that the
measures that we have asked has to ask
people to comply with the stay at home
the avoid social cat contact can have
detrimental effects in terms of in terms
of health but also emotional and social
effects as you as you have asked in your
question and and we are very keen as
though all my clinical and scientific
colleagues to make sure that as soon as
we possibly can we are able to give
advice that allows those measures to be
to be relaxed as you have heard a number
of times the harm that might be done in
terms of health as a direct effect of
the virus deaths due to the virus has to
be balanced off over time against the
harm that he's done around lockdown and
it's not easy that those are two things
that it's not easy to reconcile but I
can say that we are very very aware of
the effects that lockdown has both
socially emotionally and on health and
that's why plotting a way ahead that
allows over time those restrictions to
be lifted while at the same time keeping
the transmission rate low in the
community is absolutely the goal that we
are working towards thank you thank you
well we'll turn now to questions from
representatives of news organizations
and the first is from Chris Mason of the
BBC Chris hello good afternoon to you
both Mr Gove is the lockdown measures
begin to ease how is the government
going to persuade people that it is safe
to be out and about more and professor
Paris how confident are you in the model
that predict what impacts a particular
change in the rules might actually have
well thank you Chris you're absolutely
right the the the British public have
shown amazing stoicism and understanding
of the need for the lockdown measures
and quite rightly they want to ensure
that if and when they are eased that
they're eased in a way that makes sure
that the British people sacrifice has
been worthwhile and that we continue to
operate in a way which means that public
health comes first and that's why it's
so important that we consult with
employers and with trade unions in order
to make sure that people understand the
guidance about working safely it's also
important that we make clear that any
approach that we take is staged that
we're not as the First Minister of
Scotland said flicking a switch and
going from one situation back to the old
normal our phased approach is one which
allows us to monitor the impact that
those changes are having on public
health and if necessary in a specific
and localised way that means that we can
pause or even reintroduce those
restrictions that might be required in
order to deal with localised outbreaks
of the disease and of course it's also
important that we make sure that people
have the as well as the right guidance
and the right safe working environment
the right personal protective equipment
as well and that will vary from setting
to setting the type of PPE that you will
need if you're operating in intensive
care is different from the type of PPE
that you might require in another public
sector setting and then the final thing
is Matt Hancock's amazing success in
increasing testing means that people can
have greater confidence along with the
development of the test track and trace
approach that's being posited in the
Isle of Wight
that we will be able to make sure the
people who are suffering from the virus
can be they and their contacts can be
encouraged to stay at home so that we
can limit the potential of any outbreak
yeah so it's on the modeling I think
Chris are always the first point to make
is that modeling is just that it is a
process of taking a set of assumptions a
set of knowns and predicting what will
happen in the future and the reality
will always be
different fraud from the model it will
not be exactly replicate the model and
sometimes some of the assumptions you
can't be certain about and and there are
some unknowns when you model so having
said that right at the start of this a
reasonable worst-case scenario model was
produced by the government or for the
government which predicted what would
happen if no measures were taken to to
MIT to prevent or to mitigate or to
reduce the level of transmission in the
community of course no country has
actually stood aside and and not put in
place some form of social distancing
measures so so we will not you know we
won't know what that would have been
against that model because everybody has
put in a set of measures that has meant
that that that didn't happen once the
lockdown measures were in place and
other other models would produce that
took into account the predicted
compliance of the public with those
lockdown measures and as I've said
you've heard before the the brief public
have been really excellent at complying
with those and in fact what we have seen
certainly in the NHS in terms of the
predictions those sorts of model and the
models come from a variety of academic
groups working together as predicted in
terms of bed numbers bed usage has
actually the the reality has actually
followed the shape of those predictions
it never follows it perfectly in
absolute numbers but it's followed it
pretty much in the shape of what we've
seen so that does give me some
confidence that going forward that
models are a reasonable way of
predicting what we might see and they do
predict that over the next month or so
we will continue to see a decline in the
number of patients in hospital with
kovat 19 the number of people in
critical care and indeed the number of
deaths and of course that is what we are
seeing in in reality clearly we will
need to do more modeling clearly it's
important that various academic groups
feed into those models that is right and
proper that is what's aged another and
the modeling groups do they will never
be an absolute perfect prediction of
reality but I have confidence that going
forward
they will give us a very good guide of
what we what we are likely to see thank
you very much it was that houki chris is
there anything you wanted to follow up
on where you wanted just further
elucidation very quick follow up with
you Mr Gove we've got very used to the
the mantra plastered across the the
lecterns you're stood behind and can we
expect a more subtle message to come in
the next phase to mirror what could be a
more subtle and more nuanced set of
rules well I think you're right that the
the message has been taken to the heart
of the British people what we need to do
I think is just to make sure that they
on the ground advice that we give is
sufficiently reassuring I think it's
about making sure that people feel that
the pointers that we're giving about how
a workplace can be safe are sensible
reliable supported by employers and
trade unions I think myself that's the
most important thing um and I'll turn
now to Dan Huot of ITV hello sorry about
that hunter and me myself I'm gonna have
to mean to both of you and first of all
on the NHS contact tracing app has been
trialed in the Isle of Wight and this
week given you need fifty to sixty
percent of the entire population and to
download this app once it's up and
running how crucial how central will it
be to the government's policy of
suppressing the virus and how much will
it dictate going forward the measures
you have put in place or lift in terms
of the lockdown and secondly on testing
that's in the number fall to 76,000 or
so and how do you account for that
sharp fall and in just 24 hours and how
concerned are you by the fall of almost
30,000 tests well thank you Dan um on
the first you're absolutely right that
when it comes to contact tracing the
more people who download the app that's
been developed by the NHS the better
there are some 80,000 households on the
Isle of Wight and obviously we'd like to
see more than half of hassles if we can
sign up to the app but it's striking and
it refers back obviously two points to
Chris Mason made how public spirited
people have been throughout this crisis
and knowing that this is a contribution
that all of us can make to helping to
keep our neighbors and our communities
safer I think is
very very powerful incentive and the
leader of the other white council and
the Alouettes MP the excellent Bob see
they have both said that they believe
that it's in the interests of the island
and of the country that as many people
as possible
sign up to the app on the point about
testing it is the case that you might
expect over a weekend to declare
veracity with fewer people going to work
that you might have a dip in the amount
of testing that that might occur at that
time but again I didn't think it in any
way two tracks from the amazing
achievement of the NHS and of others and
so significantly increasing the amount
of tests that are available yes so on
the app I think you're absolutely right
it is one component of a number it
likely to be one component of a number
of measures that will be needed I would
think it's unlikely that on its own it
is going to be the single measure or the
single intervention that will ensure
that the virus is always under control
there will need to be contact tracing in
the way we've always done contact
tracing so people following leads as to
who you've contacted that's exactly why
public health England are recruit
recruiting many thousands of people to
help with contact tracing and and it
will need to set aside other measures
that we have become used to such as if
you are symptomatic and if you you have
the virus and if you test positive you
will need to stay at home for a period
so it is one component the more people
who download it and use it the likely
the bigger contribution it will make but
it will not be the single contribution
and of course testing it will help us to
understand before it is deployed exactly
what that contribution is likely to be
so the testing in the Isle of Wight is a
very important phase in understanding
how the app is going to be used and
exactly what the contribution will be
thanks den did you want to come back on
anything there only on the app what
evidence do you have maybe from other
countries or the research you've done so
far the suggests this could actually
work because clearly it's a it's a it's
very new so I take I've got the sense
from press of powers that you're not
overly reliant on this well again
professor Paris
I'm blowing the point that it is it's
one arrow in the quiver but it is the
case that other countries Germany and
France are developing apps as well and
we want to make sure that they're
interoperable the fact that other
developed nations and our European
friends and partners are going down this
route
I think only underlines how wise NHS X
was to invest in and to lead on this
technology but yes other countries are
developing or using apps not not
everybody has deployed one so you're
absolutely right there will be
international learning as we go forward
as to when these apps are deployed in
some of the Far Eastern countries they
have been used successfully so there is
evidence that they can be used as part
of a series of measures but I think even
in those countries such as Singapore and
other countries again it is a suite of
measures it is not a single measure so
we will we will learn some of that as we
test then as we roll it out and and I
think the other important point to make
is that this is this will never be about
a single set of measures that you freeze
and then don't change over time I think
measures will always need to be reviewed
and adjusted based on what the infection
is doing and what the reality of the
situation is but the app will be an
important component of that going
forward thanks to you thank you well
turn now to indigo Gilmour from Channel
four News
indigo Mr Gove do you agree with your
transport secretary that had mad math
testing been in place sooner many lives
could have been saved and Mr Gove you
keep telling us you're on top of the PPE
issue once again today but a BMA report
out today said that half of doctors had
to source their own PPE because the
government failed to do so what would
you say to the families of front-line
NHS workers who've died without being
provided with a proper protective
equipment that they needed well thank
you and go on the first point about
about testing again I think there will
be a time when we've got this virus
under control when we can ask ourselves
some deep and probing questions about
lessons that we can learn as a country
from
we handled this virus in its early
stages I would just say that the amazing
achievement of Matt Hancock Jim Bethel
our NHS and others in ensuring that we
can increase the number of tests it has
been I think an example of what the
public sector and the private sector
working together under a very strong
political leadership can achieve but of
course we will have an opportunity in
due course to look back and to reflect
and to consider what it is that we got
right and what it is that we got wrong
undoubtedly this government like all
governments will have made mistakes but
it will be impossible to determine
exactly which were the areas of gravest
concern until sometime in the future
when we have all the information that we
need I'm on PPE I would never say that
we were on top I would always say that
we were doing everything that we can and
it's naturally of concern to any of us
if people on the front line don't have
the right personal protective equipment
but it is the case as you'll be aware
that the BMA does an excellent job
principally but not exclusively in
representing people on in primary care
GPS and so on and it has been the case
in the past that for those in general
practice that they will have been
sourcing quite a lot of their own
equipment themselves in any case but of
course we want to make sure that we do
everything at an NHS level and beyond to
support everyone who does have the right
personal protective equipment and again
there will be an opportunity in due
course to look back and to see what
we've got right and what we haven't got
right when it comes to making sure that
frontline workers get everything that
they need in the meantime though all of
our focus is on making sure that we can
do as well as possible in supporting
people who are putting everything on the
line to look after us so I hope that's
helpful but you may want to follow me
failings over PPE and what are you
saying to their families
who's lost their loved ones frontline
NHS workers well every every death is a
tragedy and we want to make sure that we
do everything that we can to support
those who are on the frontline in the
NHS and the will as I say be a moment
when we can
effect on what might have been done
better in the meantime what we must do
is to make sure as Lord Dayton is doing
as the Department of Health is doing as
every arm of government is doing that we
use all of the tools at our disposal to
increase production of the ganges'
aprons gloves visors and other equipment
the people on the front line need of
course it is important to recognize them
and I know you do that the range of
personal protective equipment that might
be needed in in one setting will be
different from from another but Steve
you may want to say a little bit more
well well on PPE obviously as a doctor
who worked on the front line for many
many years I've said before and I'll say
again I know how critical it is that PPE
is provided to my colleagues my friends
on the front line I know that that has
been a challenge
I know government has been working very
very hard I know that it's an
international market that is under
significant stress as every country
tries to purchase PPE a couple of weeks
ago I know I was concerned about gowns
the position on gowns actually has
improved a bit over the last couple of
weeks so depending upon the item of PPE
things will improve over time but but it
is a challenge for exactly the reasons
that we said but it is absolutely
critical as you said that government
stays on top of that that challenge and
PPE is provided to frontline staff yes
and Steve is right it is I mean it
doesn't take away from the
responsibilities of any of us in
government but it is a global challenge
and Channel four News viewers and others
will have seen some of the protests and
other countries in France and Germany as
doctors there have complained about the
lack of PPE as I say that doesn't take
away for a second from our
responsibility to do even better but it
does mean III think the people recognize
that this is a global Travon Chris hope
of the telecom mask you grew up chaps
today talked of one-way systems in
stations and stagger starts the working
day when will daily life returns what we
knew before the pandemic struck how many
years might it take
let me start quickly miss a professor
Paris Nightingale hospitals are empty
were they built an error or to be filled
the second wave just quick cover quick
ones what is the viruses our value today
what was the exact date last week and
what exact time when UK passed through
the peak and that's for very important
questions Chris on on the on the first
one about when can we return to normal I
think people have used the phrase a new
normal and by that I think what they've
sought to imply is that we can begin we
hope as you quite rightly point out as
they as they all not figure comes down
to ease some of the restrictions but we
we have to do so in a cautious fashion
and the tropical sector was right to say
that we can begin to see perhaps more
people use public transport but provided
they are helped to to stagger or to
control the times when they use public
transport and the way that people have
already adjusted to how they might use
supermarkets and food shops and so on
ultimately unless and until we have a
vaccine then I suspect that we're going
to have to live with some degree of
constraint because of the nature of the
of the virus but we obviously want to
wherever possible and consistent with
our measures on public health restore
people's lives to as close to normal as
possible but a you asked three
detailed technical questions which which
Steve may be able to answer but they're
so precise I think that they may elude
any capacity for any scientist or doctor
to answer precisely well I'll give it a
go so on the first on how long will the
new normal need to last as you might
expect that an answer that none of us
can give at the moment if I remind you
in everybody but this is a virus that at
the end of last year was not known was
had not been in the human population and
therefore the population around the
world was not immune to it so we're only
really four months into any knowledge at
all about this virus and it's really
difficult to know how this is going to
play out in in the months and years
ahead but a few things I think I can be
certain about it firstly is that the
scientific response
this virus is probably be that the
greatest to any new virus the fact that
it was sequence this genetic sequence
was known within weeks of it being
identified as mean that the sites can
accelerate very quickly including the
ability to generate produced vaccines
and start to test them and also of
course to start to use drugs and to
understand which drugs it is likely will
bind to either the virus or or parts of
the body's machinery that the virus
itself affects so that means that we can
proceed with a with a pace that's
probably the lab certain has not been
the case in other any other previous our
pandemic so that gives us hope that we
might get to a solution whether it's a
vaccine or indeed whether it's drugs
sooner that we might have hope ten
twenty years ago but it's impossible to
say when that will be but it's certainly
true to say that we will need to adapt
to a new normal until we get to that
point on the second question which was
what were the nightingales built-in
error absolutely a 100 percent not and
if you remember I was talking a little
bit earlier in response to another
question that if you wind the clock back
a month or two we were looking at an
increase in the number of cases
infections in the UK we watching images
from around the world of health systems
that were overwhelmed and we had not put
in place or we were about to put in
place a series of social distancing
measures not absolutely knowing how the
public would respond to that and it
would have been foolish to have not
planned for extra capacity within the
NHS we did that in a number of ways
including the nightingales the fact that
we have not needed to use all that
capacity is actually good news because
it means that the public have complied
with the social distancing measures they
have started to flatten that curve and
we've seen fewer admissions and
ultimately fewer deaths we might have
seen if we is if this virus had just
been left to spread unchecked and and
the very early worst-case scenarios
as I said no country has let play out
would have meant many many many deaths
and an awful lot of pressure on health
services so I think you would be a
hundred a thousand times more critical
if the NHS had not put in that extra
capacity and had become overwhelmed you
would be quite rightly asking as why we
had not gone every mile that we could
possibly go to put in that extra
capacity so the NA the nightingales were
not built in error and we may still need
them we are not through this yet
and although government policy and the
scientific advice is to try and ensure
that the virus does not start to spread
widely again we we can never absolutely
be certain and therefore for the months
ahead we need to maintain that extra
capacity until we have more certainty
and then thirdly on when was the peak so
I think that's a question that that
can't really be precisely answered as
you've heard because firstly it's been a
series of Peaks has been peaks in debts
peaks in hospital admissions and Peaks
have occurred at different times during
around the country because different
regions of the country have been in
different stages but as you saw from the
slides presented at the start
most of the measures that we are looking
at started to reduce from around the
middle of April so I think broadly we
saw that plateauing of a variety of
measures around the middle of April
thanks very much thank Steve and we'll
turn now to see in a row sorry Chris you
wanted to come back forgive me I our
body washed today sorry
oh the yes so again sorry you did that
was a fourth so I think safari violence
has said that I'm the chief medical
officer that they believe the our value
is is around 0.7 we are measuring that
directly at the moment through the work
of the Office for National Statistics I
think that's being measured by randomly
testing people in the community once
that data is has been
presented to us once that data is
available I think it will be it will be
better to give a more precise figure but
I think as patrick also explained I
think it's really impossible to come
with an absolute single precise number
because throughout the country in
different settings it will be slightly
different so I think you will always see
a range but with better data that range
will narrow thank you very much to you
thank you thanks Chris and we'll turn
now to Sienna Rogers from labor lists hi
one month ago the government announced a
scheme to release low-risk prisoners and
it was expected that up to 4,000 would
be released but after mistakes were made
the scheme was paused so mr. Gope can
you tell us how many risk assess
prisoners in total and how many pregnant
prisoners have now been released and
professor powers rates of self-harm in
English and Welsh prisons were up 14%
last year
so with visits canceled at the moment
are you concerned about the well-being
of people in cells 23 hours a day
Thank You Sienna thank you um with
respect to the early release of
prisoners the the Lord Chancellor and
his team developed a package of which
the early release of prisoners was just
one part in order to make sure that we
could restrict the spread of the virus
within the prisoner state and the reason
for that was to reduce the number of
cases from the prisoner state which
would be in our NHS so our principal aim
as always was to protect the NHS and
there were a number of changes that the
law Chancellor made to the prison system
in order to increase capacity and
including cohorting within particular
prisons and restrictions on the transfer
of prisoners but one part of it as you
quite rightly point out was the ability
in specific circumstances to release
some prisoners early and a set of tests
were applied it needed to be the case
that their first offence their index
offense was of a particular kind so they
did not pose a risk to the public and it
needed to be the case that they were
close to the time when they would have
been released anyway and as you quite
rightly point out the prisoners at the
front of the queue um were those
pregnant women who found themselves in
prison I know that there were at least
33 people who had been released I think
the number is higher than that now
but after this press conference I'll of
course talk to the Ministry of Justice
and make sure that you have the accurate
figures but as I say I think it was
around 33 who had been released this
time last week I think those were the
confirmed figures but we will get the
absolutely accurate figures for you
and I'll hand over to you yeah so on
prison health in general so I absolutely
believe that we should always be doing
as much as we possibly can to support
prison health fact about this time last
year I spent a morning in a prison in
the north of England looking at prison
health services and I was incredibly
impressed with the dedication of the
staff within the prison but also staff
and general practitioners coming in from
outside to to provide support and
clearly at a time of crisis a time of
emergency such as coronavirus it's
really important that we we place an
additional focus on ensuring that prison
health is responding at the same time
it's important to ensure that we
maintain safety and we we reduce the
chance of outbreaks and and spread of
kovat but that's that's a very important
balance and it mirrors the balance in in
one sense in the community that was the
subject of one of the previous questions
as to how you balance between the sort
of measures you need to might need to
put in place to stop spread of the virus
varices ensuring that the potential
downsides of that are adequately managed
as well so yes I do think it's
incredibly important that we do that
thank you very much you see an it was
there any particular point you wanted to
follow up on sorry yes please I just
wanted to ask what are you doing right
now to prepare to the spike in prison
population that's expected when
restrictions are lifted and normal core
activities get going again well you are
right that at the moment they threw poop
from our courts into our prisons has
been lower and that's helped us to
manage the situation in prison and where
during the course of this week we'll be
looking in the ministry with
implementation group which I chair at
both how we can make sure that there are
more criminal cases which are
appropriately heard and also how we can
ensure that the prisoner state can
manage one part of that is me
ensure that we have access to additional
facilities and I think it's the case
that a former secure training center for
young offenders in Medway has been made
available to the prison of state but
it's also the case that the president
state is working with the energy and
others to make sure that there are
sufficient spaces as and when as you
quite rightly point out more criminal
cases are heard I'll turn now to Ahmed
versi from the Muslim News hi I would
like to I understand that what NHS
England and public health England have
got an inquiry into the disproportionate
impact on the covered 19 on the B AME
communities I would like to know what
are the terms of reference for this
inquiry and the names of the members of
this inquiry and secondly why is it that
whenever questions are asked regarding
this impact of coffee 19 or more miss
proportionately only we are any
communities the answer we always get is
to be with biological reasons we might
talk about because of the high
preponderance of diabetes heart
conditions and so on don't you think
there are more structural issues like
racism and discrimination that takes
that's in the community and as well as
in the national health well I think
there is a very powerful questions and
challenges often the the work that's
going on to look at the what appears to
be a significant additional number of
deaths amongst the B AME population is
being conducted by a variety of people
in the NHS public health England and of
course we're being supported by Sir
Trevor Phillips and and others in
looking at those figures and it is the
case of course that you need to look at
these things as you fully appreciate in
the r and it may be the case that
amongst some minority populations there
is as you indicate with the reference to
diabetes a
raesha prevalence of comorbidities that
may be a factor but it may also be the
factor that as we know inequality can
contribute to public health outcomes and
it may be that we need to take a step
back and look more broadly at some of
the inequalities that exist within our
society but I certainly wouldn't want to
prejudge that question and certainly I
know that Steve knows far more about
these questions than I do from a
scientific point of view Steve yeah so
it's an incredibly important question or
set of questions so the the
investigation is being undertaken by
public health England we at NHS England
don't have the core experience or the
the experts in the particular work areas
that need to look at this that is an
area where public health England has the
expertise we will of course support
public health England but the chief
medical officer has asked public health
England to look at that I haven't got a
full list of the names of people who
will be involved in that but I'm sure
that that will be available as you have
said it is possible that some of the
underlying conditions that are
associated or a higher prevalence in a
certain ethnic groups might be important
because they are also fact risk factors
that mean it's more likely to either get
the virus or to suffer the complications
but as you quite rightly say that might
not be the only reason and it's really
important that the public health England
and colleagues who are working on this
going with an open mind and look at all
the possible causes biological causes
may well be one part but it's important
that it's looked at in in the round I
absolutely agree with you there
thank you very much did you want to
follow up yeah you mentioned Trevor
Phillips there's two issues there one is
he recently said that the death phase
from the Pakistani and Bangladeshi
communities was not significantly higher
than the general population however all
the reports that I have read shows that
the Pakistani and Bangladeshi committees
are actually sir are very much
higher rate of deaths than the general
population and the reason that he gave
which is very surprising is that because
they are doing ritual ablutions um what
kind of a person that you are employing
that kind of conclusion well I'm not
aware of those comments but I do know
that Trevor Phillips as chair of the
equalities and Human Rights Commission
was always someone who was driven by the
data and public health England would do
nothing else other than follow the data
in coming to appropriate conclusions and
of course we we do need to look at as we
discussed earlier and Steve mentioned
potentially some biological factors but
also as as your question implied also
perhaps some economical structural
factors which may lead to inequality in
Latin equality may have been as a result
of discrimination but we need to look at
all these things reportedly and I think
anyone who's prepared to give their time
who is a distinguished public servant
like Trevor Phillips to help us in this
endeavor is someone who support we
welcome so thank you very much that's
the end of this press conference and I
look forward to one of my collegues
joining you at the podium tomorrow thank
you so Michael Gove they're bringing to
an end the latest Downing Street corona
virus briefing let's just remind you of
some of the main points from that press
conference which has just finished well
Mr Gove told us that yesterday more than
315 people had died with corona virus in
hospitals care homes and in the wider
community this means that a total of
twenty eight thousand 446 people had
died after testing positive for corona
virus in the UK and that's as of 5:00
p.m. yesterday on the issue of testing
Mr Gove said that seventy six thousand
four hundred and ninety-six coronavirus
tests have been carried out in the UK on
Saturday and announcing efforts to help
with the future lifting of the lockdown
he said that the government will be
trialing new tests
can trace procedures on the Isle of
Wight next week ahead of offering it
more widely later this month well a
health correspondent Richard Galpin has
been listening to all of that
Richard quite a lot of information as
there always is just let's take a look
at a slightly closer look at the
statistics that we heard in terms of the
figures that we've heard I mean the
broad picture which was spelt out is
that you know in all the major areas
infections deaths etc the numbers are
broadly coming down albeit slowly but
there's still some very high numbers for
example if you look at the number of
people who've tested positive is a
hundred and eighty-six thousand people
so it's a very large number of people
and obviously concerns about leading to
further deaths etc when you have this
number of cases and as you saying we now
have more than 28-thousand 5-hundred
roughly people who have died that number
is edging clearer and closer to Italy
and I know obviously we can't
necessarily compare these it's obviously
problematic but it could look like that
Britain will move forward to be they
have the highest number of deaths in
Europe we don't know that obviously yeah
but that is looking like a possibility
on the positive side for example number
of people in hospitals is going down and
down it's now down to 14,000 200 at the
peak it was something like 18,000 so
those numbers are coming down
significantly and obviously that's a
very important indeed so on the issue of
testing I suppose it's worth pointing
out that many more people are being
tested aren't they so if more people are
showing positive for testing some might
say that's as a result of more people
being tested yes it's a very good thing
is that that testing is now really
significantly underway very significant
numbers all though it's down a bit now
isn't it forums about a hundred thousand
at the end of last week it's now down to
about 76,000 but that was explained
during the press conference as
potentially being because of the weekend
when things do tend to lag what else
stood out for you
in the briefing there there was a very
good question when they were saying you
know how can you convince people that
it's going to be safe to come out of
lockdown
as and when that does actually happen
and Michael Gove gave pretty long answer
to it I mean obviously focusing on the
needs to be safe in doing this as
obsolete Lee the number one priority but
he was saying that they would be
consulting with employers and trade
unions and he's saying must be a phased
approach so that you can monitor the
impact of changes and if necessary re
impose some lockdown measures in in a
localized way and that presumably would
imply maybe different regions different
cities different towns not quite sure
what level that would go to but he is
talking about differentials between
different parts of the country
potentially potentially if infections
start rising in in particular areas
because of the lifting of the lockdown
and that is I think the first time we've
heard a cabinet minister talk about
measures being used in the localized way
to use the earth twice didn'ti
absolutely no sir I think you're
absolutely right I think this is
significant this is maybe you know we
were seeing a bit more of the
government's thinking that this is the
way to be able to move forward and not
you know very large parts of the country
can move on but you know and then if
necessary other parts where there were
problems then they can be dealt with in
this localized way so it doesn't affect
everybody in the country because we've
now been in lockdown for quite a long
time and it obviously has potentially
very serious impacts on people's lives
in many many different ways well we are
as you say about to enter
I think the seventh week of lockdown
this is an important week coming up
isn't it yes because we're now going to
we're waiting for this grand plan from
the Prime Minister Boris Johnson we
think that's obviously will take this
week is it they're coming to this
deadline of May the 7th which is when
they have to review the lockdown
measures once again they have to do it
every three weeks or so so we're waiting
for this really crunch announcement from
the Prime Minister about how things
could gradually be lifted or how they
could be eased and he's talking about
you know this certainly Michael Gove was
saying that this would be about how you
get the economy going again how you get
with all the economy moving how you get
children back into schools and how to
get workers into work because of us
obviously
transport is is an issue so how to get
transport up and running so that people
can get to work and then and that can be
how could that can be done safely and
then also people once they're in work
that they can actually be in work in a
safe environment so many questions so
many issues to be dealt with that
Richard many things a health
correspondent Richard Galpin there
[Music]
see the headlines as they happen and
watch BBC News live in the app and get
the full story with BBC decoder UK
forward slash news follow the story for
all the latest with BBC News